Convert "Reasoning with inductive types" to prodn, part 3 (#14676)
coq/coq: doc/sphinx/proofs/writing-proofs/reasoning-inductives.rst

     The identifiers :n:`@ident` (including the first one before the `with` clause)
     are the names of the co-induction hypotheses.

.. _equality-inductive_types:

Equality of inductive types
---------------------------

> We describe in this section some special purpose tactics dealing with
> equality of inductive sets or types. These tactics use the
> equality :g:`eq:forall (A:Type), A -> A -> Prop`, simply written with the infix
> symbol :g:`=`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we describe some special purpose tactics to deal with the equality of terms of inductive types.
These tactics use the equality :g:`eq : forall (A : Type), A -> A -> Prop`, which we denote with the infix symbol :g:`=`.
```
Perhaps something like this?

> symbol :g:`=`.

Reviewer 2: I would have liked to deviate from it even more. Explaining what the point of these tactics is. And referring to "Leibniz equality" or "definitional equality" which are defined terms in the refman.

> symbol :g:`=`.

Author: IIUC, this particular reference is for Leibniz equality.  Not sure where the text should refer to definitional equality. Are references to "states an impossible structural equality" definitional equality?  I tend to think not.

> symbol :g:`=`.

Reviewer 2: >IIUC, this particular reference is for Leibniz equality.

Yes.

> Not sure where the text should refer to definitional equality.

Not relevant. I wrote that comment too fast.

> :tacn:`discriminate` and :tacn:`injection`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tactics :tacn:`discriminate` and :tacn:`injection`
```

> :tacn:`discriminate` and :tacn:`injection`

Reviewer 2: I was not suggesting that kind of changes. I wanted a subsection title that would reflect what these tactics are used for.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: discriminate {? @induction_arg }

   .. todo PR Did I drop too much? (i.e. "The argument :n:`@one_term`
      is assumed to be a proof of a statement of :n:`@term__1 = @term__2`"

>       How would that work with a non-trivial one_term?

Reviewer 2: Yes, it would make sense that if an argument is provided, it should be a proof of an equality (typically the name of a hypothesis). [Although in the general case, it is completely possible to pass a proof term as argument instead.] You can add this to the paragraph saying that if no argument is provided, then the tactic examines all the hypotheses of the context.

Author: The description doesn't cover this case:

```
Goal True -> 1 <> 2.
intros.
discriminate.
```
in which the `True` is irrelevant and I expect `discriminate` only needs looks at the conclusion.

Can you give me an example in which a specific hypothesis is needed?

Also odd that this fails:

```
Goal True -> 1 = 2.
intros.
discriminate.   (* No primitive equality found. *)
```

> it should be a proof of an equality (typically the name of a hypothesis).

Is "proof of an equality" a precise statement?  That suggests that every hypothesis is a proof of its type, which would be problematic for `H: False`, eh?  What is more accurate wording?  It could be the name of lemma?

> It seems like you also forgot to mention that if the goal is of the form `term <> term`, then it behaves like `intro ident; discriminate ident` (quite similar to what happens for `injection` without any argument).

Forgot? You must be referring to Plato's theory of [anamnesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anamnesis_(philosophy)):

> Socrates' response is to develop his theory of anamnesis and to suggest that the soul is immortal, and repeatedly incarnated; knowledge is in the soul from eternity (86b), but each time the soul is incarnated its knowledge is forgotten in the trauma of birth.

Also not exactly like `intro ident; discriminate ident`:

```
Goal True -> 1 <> 2.
intros X.
discriminate X.  (* No primitive equality found. *)
```

So maybe should say `discriminate ...` always checks the goal.  If no `induction_arg` is given, it also checks all hypotheses.  If `induction_arg` is given, it also checks that single hypothesis or "equality proof".

Reviewer 2: > The description doesn't cover this case:
> 
> ```
> Goal True -> 1 <> 2.
> intros.
> discriminate.
> ```

It used to cover this case but you didn't keep it in your new version. That's why I said "forgot". See the second part of the description of the last `discriminate` variant: https://coq.github.io/doc/v8.14/refman/proofs/writing-proofs/reasoning-inductives.html#id5

> Can you give me an example in which a specific hypothesis is needed?

It's never needed because if you don't provide one, Coq will look for one in your context. The only case where providing an argument would really be needed is if you want to discriminate on a proof term that you are building rather than something which is in your context (that wouldn't be common, and I expect this to be done only in proof automation). Example:

```coq
Require Import Arith.

Goal forall n, ~S n <= 0.
intros n H.
(* This is not a real example because this would also be solved immediately like this:
inversion H.
*)
discriminate (le_n_0_eq _ H).
```

> Is "proof of an equality" a precise statement?

Yes, that's a precise statement. An equality is a proposition and a type and a proof of an equality is a term whose type is an equality.

>That suggests that every hypothesis is a proof of its type, which would be problematic for `H: False`, eh?

That's actually entirely correct and not problematic at all. If you have `H: False` in your context, then, since you have a proof of `False`, you can prove your goal whatever it is.

> Also not exactly like `intro ident; discriminate ident`:
> 
> ```
> Goal True -> 1 <> 2.
> intros X.
> discriminate X.  (* No primitive equality found. *)
> ```

That's because there's one more `intro` to do. Try this instead:

```coq
Goal 1 <> 2.
intro X.
discriminate X.
(* works and is the same as calling discriminate in the first place *)
```

> So maybe should say `discriminate ...` always checks the goal. If no `induction_arg` is given, it also checks all hypotheses.

That's completely backward. It only checks the goal if no argument is given. In this case, it both checks all hypotheses and the goal if it has the form `_ <> _`.

Author: > >That suggests that every hypothesis is a proof of its type, which would be problematic for `H: False`, eh?

> That's actually entirely correct and not problematic at all. If you have `H: False` in your context, then, since you have a proof of `False`, you can prove your goal whatever it is.

Then the wording "proof of an equality" is incomplete.  The hypothesis is only valid within its context, not globally.  It is not a freestanding proof; that would obviously be disastrous.  It's a basic point the doc should cover somewhere.  Also, where can you find the underlying term associated with the hypothesis?

Reviewer 2: > The hypothesis is only valid within its context, not globally.

Right. Every time the term "proof" is used in the context of a proof, this is implicitly a proof in the proof context, rather than in the global context. The proof term is most often just a name of a hypothesis.

   Proves any goal using any hypothesis in the context in the form
   :n:`@term__1 = @term__2` that
   states an impossible structural equality for an inductive type.
   For example, :g:`(S (S O)) = (S O)` is impossible.

>    The tactic traverses the normal forms [1]_ of the terms looking for
>    subterms :g:`u` and :g:`w` that are subterms
>    of the normal forms of :n:`@term__1` and :n:`@term__2`, respectively,
>    placed in the same positions and whose head symbols are

Reviewer 2: This sentence is too complicated. What about simplifying like so?
```suggestion
   The tactic traverses the normal forms[1]_ of :n:`@term__1` and :n:`@term__2`,
   looking for subterms :g:`u` and :g:`w` placed in the same positions and whose
   head symbols are
```

Author: Got it.  Also replaced the footnote with a new sentence.

   different constructors. If such subterms are present, the equality is
   impossible and the current goal is completed.  Otherwise the tactic fails.

   If no :n:`@induction_arg` is provided, the tactic examines each hypothesis
   for impossible conditions.

   .. exn:: No discriminable equalities.
      :undocumented:

   :n:`@natural` (in :n:`@induction_arg`)
     Equivalent to :tacn:`intros` :n:`until @natural; discriminate @ident`,
     where :n:`@ident` is the identifier for the last introduced hypothesis.

   :n:`@ident`  (in :n:`@induction_arg`)

>      Equivalent to :n:`intros until @ident; discriminate @ident`.

Reviewer 2: This is not fully correct. This is equivalent only in the case where `ident` is not already the name of a hypothesis from the context. So could be fixed like so:
```suggestion
     If :n:`@ident` is not already in the context, this is equivalent to
     :n:`intros until @ident; discriminate @ident`.
```

Author: "primitive equality" meaning Leibniz?
I can drop this case if you like.

Reviewer 2: >"primitive equality" meaning Leibniz?

Right.

> I can drop this case if you like.

It depends on whether we keep explaining `induction_arg` in each tactic (in which case, this case is probably useless for this particular tactic) or if we explain in very general terms outside any tactic description (in which case, we should keep this case, which may makes sense for some tactics, e.g. `destruct`).

>    :n:`with @bindings`  (in :n:`@induction_arg`)

Reviewer 2: Clearer if you show the full `induction_arg`, like so:

```suggestion
   :n:`@one_term with @bindings`  (in :n:`@induction_arg`)
```

     Equivalent to :n:`discriminate @one_term` but uses the given
     bindings to instantiate parameters or hypotheses of :n:`@one_term`.

   .. note::
      The syntax :n:`discriminate @ident` can be used to refer to a hypothesis
      quantified in the goal. In this case, the quantified hypothesis whose name is
      :n:`@ident` is first introduced in the local context using

>       :n:`intros until @ident`.

Reviewer 2: Redundant with the above case on `ident`.

   .. exn:: No primitive equality found.
      :undocumented:

   .. exn:: Not a discriminable equality.
      :undocumented:

.. tacn:: ediscriminate {? @induction_arg }

>           ediscriminate {? @induction_arg }

Reviewer 2: Why is this shown twice? There is no difference between the two lines AFAICT.

Also, please indent to make this appear as a variant.

   :name: ediscriminate; _

   This works the same as :tacn:`discriminate` but if the type of :token:`one_term`, or the
   type of the hypothesis referred to by :token:`natural`, has uninstantiated
   parameters, these parameters are left as existential variables.

.. tacn:: injection {? @induction_arg } {? as {* @simple_intropattern } }

   Exploits the property that constructors of
   inductive types are injective, i.e. that if :n:`c` is a constructor of an
   inductive type and :n:`c t__1` and :n:`c t__2` are equal then
   :n:`t__1` and :n:`t__2` are equal too.

   If there is a hypothesis `H` in the form :n:`@term__1 = @term__2`,
   then :n:`injection H` applies the injectivity of constructors as deep as
   possible to derive the equality of subterms of :n:`@term__1` and
   :n:`@term__2` wherever the subterms start to differ. For example, from
   :g:`(S p, S n) = (q, S (S m))` we may derive :g:`S p = q` and

>    :g:`n = S m`. The terms must have inductive type and the same head

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :g:`n = S m`. The terms must have inductive types and the same head
```

   constructor, but must not be convertible. If so, the tactic derives the

>    equalities and adds them to the current goal as :term:`premises <premise>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   equalities and adds them to the current goal as :term:`premises <premise>`
   (except if the :n:`as` clause is used).
```

   If the current goal is of the form :n:`@term <> @term` and no :n:`induction_arg`

>    is provided, :tacn:`injection` is equivalent to :n:`intro @ident; injection @ident`.

Reviewer 2: BTW, if `injection` is called without argument on something else, it will raise the error "Not a negated primitive equality.", which doesn't seem to be documented yet.

Author: If that always produces an error, we should change the grammar to require `induction_arg`.  Also for `einduction`.  Not sure what, if any, other tactics use that.

Also, I notice that `Equality.discrConcl` is not used anywhere.

Reviewer 2: No it doesn't always produce an error. It behaves as documented if the goal has the form `_ <> _`. My point on the error message is in case it is called on a goal of another form.

>    :n:`@natural` (in :n:`induction_arg`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :n:`@natural` (in :n:`@induction_arg`)
```

     Equivalent to :tacn:`intros` :n:`until @natural` followed by
     :n:`injection @ident` where :n:`@ident` is the identifier for the last
     introduced hypothesis.

   :n:`@one_term with @bindings`  (in :n:`@induction_arg`)

>       Like :n:`injection @term` but uses the given bindings to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Like :n:`injection @one_term` but uses the given bindings to
```

      instantiate parameters or hypotheses of :n:`@one_term`.

   .. todo PR: what does "injection @ident" do?  Just tells Coq which

>       hypothesis to use?

Reviewer 2: That's correct. Note that this is a subcase of `injection @one_term`, where `@one_term` is supposed to be the proof of a primitive equality.

Author: "primitive equality" corresponds to Leibniz, setoid or definitional equality?  Better to use one of those terms.

Reviewer 2: It corresponds to Leibniz = definitional equality. I agree it would be better to use one of these two defined terms.

Author: Huh?  Leibniz and definitional equality are different things.  You mean just Leibniz, right?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I just mean Leibniz, I was confused while writing this review (thinking of too many other things at the same time).

   :n:`as {* @simple_intropattern }`

>      Apply :n:`intros {+ @simple_intropattern}` after the injection so

Reviewer 2: For consistency:

```suggestion
     Apply :n:`intros {* @simple_intropattern}` after the injection so
```

Technically this is not true because the name of the hypothesis on which `injection` is called may be reused, whereas `intros` cannot erase existing hypotheses.

Author: Which part is technically not true?  This?

> The original equality is erased if it corresponds to a hypothesis.

If so, I guess this say that the existing hypothesis will be erased but the intropattern may re-introduce it.

Reviewer 2: No, the claim that it applies `intros`. Because `intros` doesn't ever erase a name, whereas this tactic may do it.

>If so, I guess this say that the existing hypothesis will be erased but the intropattern may re-introduce it.

In some sense, this is correct (although names are only erased if this is to because they are reused in the intropattern).

     that all generated equalities become hypotheses.  The number of
     :n:`@simple_intropattern`\s must not exceed
     the number of newly generated equalities. If it is smaller, fresh
     names are generated for the unspecified items. The original equality is

>      erased if it corresponds to a hypothesis.

Reviewer 2: This is imprecise. The first name that is generated is the name of the equality, and not a fresh name. So it will always be erased if the user doesn't provide sufficiently many names or if the user includes the name of the original equality in their list.

Another point is that you've completely removed the documentation of the `as [= intropattern ]` clause, which is also supported (but doesn't explicitly appear in the syntax because it is a subcase of `as {* @simple_intropattern }`). Maybe we should make it explicit by editing the grammar in `common.edit_mlg`...

Author: You're referring to this in the 8.13.2 doc?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/129274704-6d68f339-5e27-4748-bbc3-96e28190cd03.png)

"behaves the same" seems unlikely or perhaps an ill-considered tweak for `(e)injection`.  What should it say?

> Maybe we should make it explicit by editing the grammar in `common.edit_mlg`...

We could call it out with

```
:n:`[= {* @intropattern } ]`  (in :n:`@simple_intropattern`)
```

as we have elsewhere.  Editing the grammar seems like the wrong thing to do.

Reviewer 2: > "behaves the same" seems unlikely or perhaps an ill-considered tweak for `(e)injection`. What should it say?

Here is an artificially built example where it indeed does not behave "the same":

```coq
Goal forall x y : nat, (x, y) = (y, x) -> x = y.
intros.
injection H as [= [= H1 ] H2 ].
```

This is artificial because the inner `[= ]` is not useful because injection works in depth.
If you remove the outer `[= ]`, then you get an error because if the first intro pattern is a `[= ]`, then no more intro pattern is expected.

Beyond this edge and uninteresting case, I do think the two behave exactly the same.

The reason is that the "proper" intro pattern for `injection` is the `[= ]` intro pattern. But historically it didn't exist (and it is also harder to remember), so you can "omit" the surrounding `[= ]`.

The reason I suggested editing the grammar was to make it clearer that there are two alternatives that should be considered on the same level (rather than making one appear like a subcase of the other, which it is not).

Author: I notice neither the old nor the new wording describe what happens to the goal.  For example:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/135555232-3d80ba08-574e-400a-8b47-ad68ee64bdc4.png)

Does the derived equality always get added to the beginning of the goal?  (Not looking closely enough at it, I expected you'd get the new hypothesis added directly, e.g. `H0 : n = m` rather than having to do an `intro` after the injection.

Author: > This is imprecise. The first name that is generated is the name of the equality, and not a fresh name. So it will always be erased if the user doesn't provide sufficiently many names or if the user includes the name of the original equality in their list.

Would you provide me with exact wording to cover this?  I'd prefer not to guess.

Reviewer 2: I've read your new version and I wouldn't have done any better.

   Beware that injection yields an equality in a sigma type whenever the
   injected object has a dependent type :g:`P` with its two instances in
   different types :n:`(P t__1 … t__n)` and :n:`(P u__1 … u__n)`. If :n:`t__1` and
   :n:`u__1` are the same and have for type an inductive type for which a decidable
   equality has been declared using :cmd:`Scheme` :n:`Equality …`
   (see :ref:`proofschemes-induction-principles`),

>    the use of a sigma type is avoided.

Reviewer 2: This would deserve to be in a `.. note::`. The ``(see :ref:`proofschemes-induction-principles`)`` is useless and could be removed. It would also make sense to add a reference to the tactic `dependent rewrite` from here, since this is precisely what it is used for.

The note below (which doesn't appear in the diff, so I cannot comment on it) should be gathered with the different types of `induction_arg` exactly like in the case of `discriminate`. But again, I actually doubt that it matches any real use case.

>       This error is given when one side of the equality is not a constructor.

Reviewer 2: The first listed error message doesn't exist anymore. It looks like it has been replaced by the following one:

>No information can be deduced from this equality and the injectivity of constructors. This may be because the terms are convertible, or due to pattern matching restrictions in the sort Prop. You can try to use option Set Keep Proof Equalities.

The second listed error message is also not correct. The actual error message is "No primitive equality found." like for `discriminate`.

   .. tacn:: einjection {? @induction_arg } {? as {* @simple_intropattern } }

      Works the same as :n:`injection` but if the type of :n:`@one_term`, or the
      type of the hypothesis referred to by :n:`@natural` has uninstantiated
      parameters, these parameters are left as existential variables.

      .. exn:: goal does not satisfy the expected preconditions.

>          :undocumented:

Reviewer 2: It looks like this error message doesn't exist. I can't see what it would correspond to, so I propose to just remove it.

   creating and using lemmas whenever the same instance needs to be
   inverted several times. See :ref:`derive-inversion`.

.. todo PR: I find the language "if they relate two proofs ..." confusing.
   Is there a point using "proof" here or can it be reworded to only
   refer to types?  I've seen this idiom elsewhere in the chapter.

.. note::
   Part of the behavior of the :tacn:`inversion` tactic is to generate
   equalities between expressions that appeared in the hypothesis that is
   being processed. By default, no equalities are generated if they
   relate two proofs (i.e. equalities between :token:`term`\s whose type is in sort
   :g:`Prop`). This behavior can be turned off by using the
   :flag:`Keep Proof Equalities` setting.

.. _inversion-intropattern-ex:

.. example:: :tacn:`inversion` with :n:`as @or_and_intropattern`

   .. coqtop:: reset all

      Inductive contains0 : list nat -> Prop :=
      | in_hd : forall l, contains0 (0 :: l)
      | in_tl : forall l b, contains0 l -> contains0 (b :: l).
      Goal forall l:list nat, contains0 (1 :: l) -> contains0 l.
      intros l H; inversion H as [ | l' p Hl' [Heqp Heql'] ].

>    .. tacn:: inversion_clear {| @ident | @natural } {? as @or_and_intropattern } {? in {+ @ident } }

Reviewer 2: There is an indentation problem which makes this and the following tactics appear inside the example above.

      implicitly added to this table when defined.
      Use the :cmd:`Add` and :cmd:`Remove` commands to update this set manually.

:tacn:`inversion`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: inversion {| @ident | @natural } using @one_term {? in {+ @ident } }

>           inversion {| @ident | @natural } {? as @or_and_intropattern } {? in {+ @ident } }

Author: Doesn't look good:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/129256799-0a4da55e-f4f5-4b63-b6bd-65cc766ca08f.png)

>           inversion {| @ident | @natural } {? as @or_and_intropattern } {? in {+ @ident } }

Reviewer 2: OK then keep it on two lines, but reverse their order as the `using` clause case is the less common of the two.

   :name: inversion; _

   .. comment: the other inversion* tactics don't support the using clause,
      but they should be able to, if desired.  It wouldn't make sense for
      inversion_sigma.
      See https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/14179#discussion_r642193096

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: > one of the hardest to explain and yet most important tactic

Then perhaps we should spend a bit more time now to get a good description.  Maybe start by identifying the use case(s) it's needed for, i.e. its purpose.  Why is deriving _all_ possible ways we could have proved the selected hypothesis useful?  And why _could have proved_?

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 3: When performing case analysis on a hypothesis `H` whose type is an inductive with multiple constructors and non-trivial indices, there are a couple of steps:
1. Generalize any non-variable indices in `H`,
  a. optionally also generalizing those terms in the goal,
  b. optionally also generalizing those terms in all other hypotheses, and
  c. optionally generating equations that relate the fresh variables to the original terms.
2. Replace the current goal with a fresh subgoal for each constructor of the inductive type, adjusting the newly-generalized indices as necessary
  a. optionally replacing `H` in the goal with the application of the constructor to its, arguments,
  b. optionally replacing `H` in the hypotheses with the application of the constructor to its arguments,
  c. optionally leaving behind an induction hypothesis in the relevant goals
  d. optionally leaving an equation relating `H` to the application of the constructor to its arguments
3. Decompose the equations left behind by 1(c) to
  a. close absurd subgoals (such as those with an equation that `Some _ = None` or `0 = 1`) and
  b. simplify information when an equation is an equality between the same (non-dependent) constructor of an inductive type, just with different arguments (such as turning `Some x = Some y` into `x = y`)
  c. optionally doing the same simplification to dependent constructors such as those of sigma types
  d. optionally substituting any equations which equate a variable with anything else

Roughly (because I've excluded nuances such as whether things are reverted)
- `case` does 1, 1a, 2, 2a
- `case_eq` adds step 2d to `case`
- `elim` adds step 2c to `case`
- `destruct` does 1, 1a, 1b, 2, 2a, 2b; adding `eqn:` adds step 2d
- `induction` adds step 2c to `destruct`
- I think `dependent induction` adds steps 1c, 2d, and 3d to `induction`, but I haven't used it much and this is probably not quite right (because the different tactics all perform slight variations on these steps)
- `inversion` roughly performs steps 1, 1c, 2, 3a, and (roughly) a single step of 3b, unless the original inductive type was already an equality, in which case it performs 3b twice
- `inversion_clear` adds 3d to `inversion` and also clears the original `H`
- `injection` (or is it `injections`?) performs 3c repeatedly(?)
- `subst` does only 3d

Most often, `inversion` is used to perform a single step of 3c on an equality-like hypothesis.  Sometimes it's used to perform 3c on something non-equality-like, such as a vector.  Occasionally it's used for its other steps.

"all possible ways" corresponds to 2 ("each constructor"); this is the primitive building block of case analysis

"could have proved" corresponds to 3a (we don't need to consider cases that are impossible, such as the case that a list of length 1 is nil)

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: @JasonGross That's a lot of detail.  It seems like it would be complex to document and for users to read.  It would take a significant effort to refine ("roughly", "probably not quite right") and get accurate (many examples/experiments).  In an ideal world, shouldn't these tactics behave more similarly with fewer one-off differences?  If so, that's an argument for less detail until we've made improvements.

Perhaps it would be helpful to identify which tactics share code (just passing different parameters).

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 3: > In an ideal world, shouldn't these tactics behave more similarly with fewer one-off differences?

Yes.  I almost wrote that I believe that these tactics should all be replaced by a single `invert` tactic a la http://gallium.inria.fr/blog/a-new-Coq-tactic-for-inversion/

> Perhaps it would be helpful to identify which tactics share code (just passing different parameters).

Sure

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 2: > Then perhaps we should spend a bit more time now to get a good description.

I don't feel up to the task unfortunately. That's why I summoned Jason, and from his answers, it looks to me like all we can do is acknowledge that this is all very messy and hard to understand in depth, but focus on the most important things (because from `destruct` to `inversion`, through `discriminate` and `injection`, these are all essential tactics that beginners have to learn!).

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: OK, I'll make limited improvements in this PR.  For the longer term, do you think this is one of the harder points for beginners and users in general to understand/master?  And thus worth spending significant time improving the doc and/or the definition of these tactics?

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 2: Yes, at least in my experience teaching Coq to students. Certainly worth spending time improving both the tactics and the documentation.

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: [This](https://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs3110/2018sp/a5/coq-tactics-cheatsheet.html#inversion) suggests that, in part, `inversion` on a hypothesis is similar to `f_equal` on a goal.

What do you think of the presentation in [Software Foundations](https://softwarefoundations.cis.upenn.edu/lf-current/IndProp.html)?  I've not dug into that yet.

In this:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/135199865-b67474be-2df9-4f19-b36d-c5e9efecb1b9.png)

"deriving" means to add new hypotheses or new goals or both?  The number of things added is <= the number of constructors?

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: Shouldn't `c i` be c with the subscript i?

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 2: > [This](https://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs3110/2018sp/a5/coq-tactics-cheatsheet.html#inversion) suggests that, in part, `inversion` on a hypothesis is similar to `f_equal` on a goal.

That's not a good description of `inversion` (it's limited to the subcases that correspond to `discriminate` / `injection`). And indeed, that's closer to how I describe `injection` to my students (doing the comparison with `f_equal`, reminding that `f_equal` can apply for any function, while `injection` only works with constructors because it uses the property that constructors are indeed *injective*).

> What do you think of the presentation in [Software Foundations](https://softwarefoundations.cis.upenn.edu/lf-current/IndProp.html)? I've not dug into that yet.

Having just a cursory look, it looks to me like a good introduction to the concept of inductive propositions and `inversion`.

> "deriving" means to add new hypotheses or new goals or both? The number of things added is <= the number of constructors?

`inversion` transforms the current goal into as many goals as there are hypotheses (except in case it can derive some contradiction for some of these goals, in which case it removes them). For each of these new goals it may add a various number of new hypotheses that gives information about the arguments to these constructors.

> Shouldn't `c i` be c with the subscript i?

Yes.

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: 1. Is there a simple taxonomy here?  If this is on the right track, I'll say something like this here, but may need to refine/strengthen the language:

- Inversion is recommended or necessary to prove propositions defined on inductives of type Prop.
- Inversion is generally not needed to prove propositions defined on inductives of type Set  (e.g. S (n + m) = n + (S m))
- Generally use inductively defined propositions to define subsets of other inductives (e.g. "even" is a subset of nat, as in SF)

Or maybe the key difference is the presence of the arrow in `nat → Prop` in `ev`?

```
Inductive nat : Set :=
  | O : nat
  | S : nat -> nat.

Inductive ev : nat → Prop :=
  | ev_0 : ev 0
  | ev_SS (n : nat) (H : ev n) : ev (S (S n)).
```

Maybe also be a bit more specific in the `even` example for the `Inductive` command?

2. Should this be written as `I(t)`?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/135386305-f6b3dd66-ee10-4b8b-b57f-e54479f6abf5.png)

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: Also, should the circled part be just be `t`?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/135388980-b0f0dc7a-0cdf-4110-bf65-9211ae188ce3.png)

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 2: > Is there a simple taxonomy here? If this is on the right track, I'll say something like this here, but may need to refine/strengthen the language:

I wouldn't present things like you do based on the sorts, but rather on whether the proposition itself has an inductive type or not. Furthermore, the proposition which should be considered for this dichotomy is not the goal but one of the hypothesis that you intend to make use of.

> Should this be written as `I(t)`?

No, I think it makes sense to use the function application notation from Coq in this context, rather than the mathematical one.

> Also, should the circled part be just be `t`?

No, the inductive type is `I` (applied to its arguments represented as `t`). If we want, we can drop the `t` part and make this just `each constructor of I`.

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: Oh?  How would you define "inductive type"?  I took it to mean anything defined with `Inductive`.  Including all propositions that contains variables of that type (e.g. nat) seems so expansive here as to be meaningless.  (FWIW, I notice `True` and `False` are defined with `Inductive`, but induction and inversion are not useful for them.)

Seems to me that the constructors are defined in the `Inductive` and thus are associated with `t`, not `(I t)`.  I suppose that a proposition on `nat list` would use the constructors for `list` and not `nat`.  And who know what it would do with `(prop on nat) \/ (prop on Z)`.

Much of the difficulty in explaining inversion is that there's no explanation or example of the what the "necessary conditions" are before they're processed further, or how they are determined.

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: > `inversion` transforms the current goal into as many goals as there are hypotheses (except in case it can derive some contradiction for some of these goals, in which case it removes them).

Should be "as many goals as there are constructors", right?

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: See what I did.  It's probably not 100% correct.

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 2: > How would you define "inductive type"? I took it to mean anything defined with Inductive.

You are correct.

> Including all propositions that contains variables of that type (e.g. nat) seems so expansive here as to be meaningless.

That's not what I meant. I said "whether the proposition has an inductive type" not "whether the proposition is an inductive type".

>FWIW, I notice True and False are defined with Inductive, but induction and inversion are not useful for them.

Actually, if you have `H: False` in your context, then doing `inversion H` (or `induction H` or `destruct H`) will solve the goal. If `H: True`, then `inversion H` is useless because there is no additional information to be extracted from this hypothesis (and `induction H` or `destruct H` will simply remove `H` from the context).

> Seems to me that the constructors are defined in the `Inductive` and thus are associated with `t`, not `(I t)`. I suppose that a proposition on `nat list` would use the constructors for `list` and not `nat`.

You may be confusing Coq syntax with OCaml syntax. `nat list` doesn't type check in Coq. `list nat` does. `I` is the inductive type. That's why the letter `I` was used.

>Should be "as many goals as there are constructors", right?

Yes, sorry.

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: > > Seems to me that the constructors are defined in the `Inductive` and thus are associated with `t`, not `(I t)`. I suppose that a proposition on `nat list` would use the constructors for `list` and not `nat`.

> You may be confusing Coq syntax with OCaml syntax. `nat list` doesn't type check in Coq. `list nat` does. `I` is the inductive type. That's why the letter `I` was used.

nat list, list nat, that's a detail.  My point was that constructors are attached to `Inductive` definitions, i.e. associated with `t`, not with (I t).  I don't quite understand what you mean when you say "(I t) has an inductive type".

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 2: Yes, constructors are attached to `Inductive` definition. `I` stands for `Inductive`.
I never said or suggested that `I t` has an inductive type. `I t` is *the* inductive type.

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 2: Are you confusing `I t` with `I : t`? I fail to understand why you would think `t` is the type otherwise. In any case, I stand what I said. You can replace `I t` with just `I` if you want, but certainly not by `t`.

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: We're going a bit in circles and the time delay between messages doesn't help.  Perhaps you have time to do a short video call sometime (Sunday at the earliest)?

But let's try this: suppose you have
m, n : nat
H : (m + n) = (n + m)

H is (I t).  What is t?  Isn't it `nat`?  Is it `n` or `m`?  And given an expression such H, of course it is a type, but how do you know it is an _inductive_ type?  What's the definition?

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 3: Perhaps the issue is that in OCaml, `I t` would mean "a type family `t` with parameter `I`", while in Coq it means "an inductive type family `I` applied to the argument `t`".  In fact there's a missing nuance here, though, which is that I believe the correctly generalized case is actually `I t1 t2 ... tn`, not just `I t`.  In your example @jfehrle, `I` is the type family `eq` and `t` stands in for the sequence of arguments `nat`, `m + n`, `n + m`, I believe.  An inductive type is a type which, when reduced to head normal form, is the application of a constant defined via `Inductive` to some arguments.  This constant is called the *inductive type family*, or, if there are no arguments and the constant is already a type, it's called the *inductive type*.

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 2: One again, `H` is not the type. The type of `H` is what's on the right side of `:`. This is what is represented by `I t` in this text, expect that, like Jason said, `I` has got more than one argument in your example.

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: I think we should drop the notation `(I t)`--it's a fuzzy shorthand that AFAIK we don't use elsewhere.

Writing `I t1 t2 ... tn` isn't an improvement.  It would require explaining which of multiple Inductives would be expanded (whether n or m in my expression or whether, say,  to expand on nat or list in a different expression).  I don't know what `inversion` would do with either of those expressions.  I don't know the tactic well enough to be sure I would try the right examples--or whether they're valid.

> An inductive type is a type which, when reduced to head normal form, is the application of a constant defined via Inductive to some arguments.

What are examples of types that are _not_ inductive types?  Not sure it's useful to introduce the term at all.  Even `True` and `False` are `Inductive`s.  The thing users want to know is which `Inductive` provides the constructors.  If we know the rule and it's simple, we could state it in the doc.  And if not, we can omit that detail.

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 2: It's `I` which provides the constructor. That's why I said that it was OK to drop the `t` and leave only the `I`.

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Author: I think we're getting tripped up by two meanings of "type" here.  H is a name for the type `(m + n) = (n + m)` on the logic side of the Curry Howard isomorphism.  Interpreting the same symbols on the programming side, it is an expression that evaluates to a value of type `nat`.  Constructors are associated with `nat`, not with `I`.  WDYT?

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 2: > H is a name for the type `(m + n) = (n + m)` on the logic side of the Curry Howard isomorphism. Interpreting the same symbols on the programming side, it is an expression that evaluates to a value of type `nat`.

Both sentences are incorrect. `H` is not a name for the type, it is a variable of this type. It represents a proof (i.e., a term) of this proposition / type. `H` does not evaluate to a value of type `nat`. `m` and `n` do. `H` is a value of (inductive) type `eq` (applied to arguments `(m + n)` and `(n + m)`). If you called `inversion H`, the constructors that would be used are the one for `eq`. (And BTW, since `eq` has a single constructor with no arguments, you would learn exactly nothing: the hypothesis gets just duplicated).

>    .. todo PR: following is clear as mud

Reviewer 2: Looks good to me.

   Let the type of :n:`@ident` in the local context be :g:`(I t)`, where :g:`I`

>    is a (co-)inductive predicate. Then, ``inversion`` applied to :n:`@ident`

Reviewer: That doesn't look right to me, are we writing "co-inductive" anywhere else? I believe it should always be coinductive.

Author: Currently in the doc:
coinductive: 12 uses
co-inductive: 38 uses
Googling suggests that "coinductive" is preferred.  I will use that.

FWIW, I just ran across this 60 page [A Tutorial on [Co-]Inductive Types in Coq](https://www.labri.fr/perso/casteran/RecTutorial.pdf).  If it's not totally out of date
(it refers to Coq 8.0), perhaps worth including a link to it somewhere in the doc?

Author: Did the same for `co-recursion` and `co-fixpoint`.  Not so sure about `co-pattern`:

> "Such a technique is akin to the *co-pattern* style that can be
found in e.g. Agda, and preserves subject reduction."

Reviewer: I think copattern is more correct and FWIW Agda agrees too: https://agda.readthedocs.io/en/v2.6.0.1/language/copatterns.html

Reviewer 2: > FWIW, I just ran across this 60 page [A Tutorial on [Co-]Inductive Types in Coq](https://www.labri.fr/perso/casteran/RecTutorial.pdf). If it's not totally out of date (it refers to Coq 8.0), perhaps worth including a link to it somewhere in the doc?

I don't know how up-to-date / out-of-date this is (probably worth discussing in another issue cc-ing its author `@Casteran` and `@palmskog`) but I know that this associated Coq file is being maintained: https://github.com/coq-community/coq-art/blob/master/tutorial_inductive_co_inductive_types/SRC/RecTutorial.v
That being said, there might be other reasons to consider this tutorial out-of-date, e.g., if it doesn't mention the most frequently used techniques for managing coinductive types (e.g. paco?).

     where :n:`@ident` is the identifier for the last introduced hypothesis.

   :n:`{? in {+ @ident } }`
     When :n:`{+ @ident}` are identifiers in the local context, this causes
     generalizing on :n:`{+ @ident}` as the initial step of `inversion`.
     See :tacn:`generalize`.

   .. todo PR: "generalizing"?  As in :n:`generalize @ident__1; ... generalize @ident__n` ?

   :n:`as @or_and_intropattern`
      Provides names for the variables introduced in each new subgoal.  The
      :token:`or_and_intropattern` must have one :n:`{* @intropattern }`
      for each constructor of the type of :n:`(I t)`, given in the order
      in which the constructors are defined.
      If there are not enough names, Coq picks fresh names.

     If an equation splits into several
     equations (because ``inversion`` applies ``injection`` on the equalities it
     generates), the corresponding :n:`@intropattern` should be in the form of
     :n:`@or_and_intropattern` (or the equivalent :n:`{*, ( @simple_intropattern ) }`),
     with the number of entries equal to the number
     of subequalities obtained from splitting the original equation.

>      Here is an example: the ``inversion … as`` variant of

Reviewer 2: From the text before this PR, it rather looks to me like "Here is an example" was left in the middle of the paragraph but didn't actually relate to the following text. So please remove it (or link to the actual example that still appears below).

Author: Added a link, but not sure it's in the right place.

     ``inversion`` generally behaves in a slightly more expected way than
     ``inversion`` (no artificial duplication of some hypotheses referring to
     other hypotheses). To take advantage of these improvements, it is enough to use
     ``inversion … as []``, letting Coq choose fresh names.

.. note::
   If :n:`@ident` does not denote a hypothesis in the local context but
   refers to a hypothesis quantified in the goal, then the latter is

>    first introduced in the local context using :n:`intros until @ident`.

Reviewer 2: I have the same doubts about the validity of this use case, and generally the same remarks regarding this as for `discriminate` and `injection`.

Author: Would you be willing to try it and see if it's accurate or not?

.. note::
   As ``inversion`` proofs may be large, we recommend
   creating and using lemmas whenever the same instance needs to be
   inverted several times. See :ref:`derive-inversion`.

.. todo PR: I find the language "if they relate two proofs ..." confusing.
   Is there a point using "proof" here or can it be reworded to only

>    refer to types?  I've seen this idiom elsewhere in the chapter.

Reviewer 2: What are denoted by "proofs" in this chapter is terms whose type is a proposition (i.e. has type `Prop`). So no, we cannot reword like you suggest.

Reviewer 2: IIUC what you suggest, absolutely not! Proofs are terms whose type is a proposition and propositions are types whose sort is `Prop`. So the two are not at the same level.

.. note::
   Part of the behavior of the :tacn:`inversion` tactic is to generate
   equalities between expressions that appeared in the hypothesis that is
   being processed. By default, no equalities are generated if they
   relate two proofs (i.e. equalities between :token:`term`\s whose type is in sort
   :g:`Prop`). This behavior can be turned off by using the
   :flag:`Keep Proof Equalities` setting.

>    .. example:: :tacn:`inversion` with :n:`as @or_and_intropattern`

Reviewer 2: This is indented too much (not related to the `.. note::` in which it appears).

         Goal forall l:list nat, contains0 (1 :: l) -> contains0 l.
         intros l H; inversion H as [ | l' p Hl' [Heqp Heql'] ].

> .. tacn:: inversion_clear {| @ident | @natural } {? as @or_and_intropattern } {? in {+ @ident } }

Reviewer 2: Can we indent (to make them appear as variants) everything from `inversion_clear` to `simple inversion`? Also, I suggest moving `simple inversion` up just after `inversion_clear`, and using the same order for the `dependent inversion` variants, which could all be gathered in a single `.. tacn::`.

Author: > which could all be gathered in a single `.. tacn::`.

You mean like this?? I don't see the benefit.  The descriptions are different.
```
   .. tacn:: dependent inversion {| @ident | @natural } {? as @or_and_intropattern } {? with @one_term }
             dependent inversion_clear {| @ident | @natural } {? as @or_and_intropattern } {? with @one_term }
             dependent simple inversion {| @ident | @natural } {? as @or_and_intropattern } {? with @one_term }
```

Reviewer 2: No, not like this. Just indenting and reordering the tactics and their descriptions, not gathering the descriptions together.

.. seealso:: :tacn:`functional inversion`

> .. tacn:: decide equality

Reviewer 2: I guess there should be a sub-section title here. Something like "Helper tactics". Maybe @JasonGross would have a better suggestion.

Another possibility is to move the various helper tactics closer to the tactic they are useful for.

Author: I'd lean toward moving the "helper tactics" closer to the the ones they help.  "Helper tactics" is not a very informative title.  The helper tactics are all of `decide equality` .. `dependent rewrite`?  Where should each one go?

Reviewer 2: Correct. Most of them already mention in their description which tactic they are useful for. The other ones, we would have to ask.

   .. todo PR: why the curly braces below instead of parentheses?

>       shouldn't "+" be "/\"?

Reviewer 2: No. `{ ... } + { ... }` is a notation for sum types defined in the standard library.

Author: A fairly big wart on the notation system is that it's very hard to find notation definitions.  CoqIDE should provide a way to do this.

In this case `Reserved Notation "{ A }  +  { B }" (at level 50, left associativity).` doesn't match the obvious regex (to me, after doing this a bunch) `Notation.*} \+ \{` because of the extra spaces.

Reviewer 2: `Locate` can be used for this purpose. E.g., `Locate "{ _ } + { _ }".` gives `Notation "{ A } + { B }" := (sumbool A B) : type_scope (default interpretation)`. CoqIDE could indeed be improved to automatically do this `Locate` query when, e.g., hovering over a notation.

   Solves a goal of the form :g:`forall x y : R, {x = y} + {~ x = y}`,
   where :g:`R` is an inductive type such that its constructors do not take
   proofs or functions as arguments, nor objects in dependent types. It
   solves goals of the form :g:`{x = y} + {~ x = y}` as well.

.. tacn:: compare @one_term__1 @one_term__2

   Compares two :n:`@one_term`\s of an
   inductive datatype. If :g:`G` is the current goal, it leaves the
   sub-goals :n:`@one_term__1 = @one_term__2 -> G` and :n:`~ @one_term__1 = @one_term__2 -> G`.
   The type of the :n:`@one_term`\s must satisfy the same restrictions as in the
   tactic ``decide equality``.

.. tacn:: simplify_eq {? @induction_arg }

   .. todo PR: seems like it requires term1 <> term2

   Examines goals that have the form :n:`@term__1 = @term__2`.  If the terms are
   structurally different, the tactic does a :tacn:`discriminate`.  Otherwise, it does
   an :tacn:`injection` to simplify the equality, if possible.

   See the description of :token:`induction_arg` for an explanation of the
   parameters.

>    .. todo PR: is there a better name than "induction_arg"?

Reviewer 2: What about `ident_nat_or_term` or something along these lines that would simply describe the usual cases it encompasses?

Author: It's not just the name.  I think the main issue is that the text describing `induction_arg` is too specific to `destruct` and AFAIK simply subsituting `simplify_eq` into that text is not nearly enough.  So seems like it needs a new description entirely and we can pick a new name for the nonterminal.

How do we describe it for here?

Reviewer 2: > simply subsituting `simplify_eq` into that text is not nearly enough

Should be checked but there are relatively good chances that this is actually enough. Currently, the explanations for `induction_arg` as repeated in `destruct`, `induction`, `injection`... and it would indeed probably be worth factorizing them outside all of these tactics, using general language and making sure that we don't miss any subcase. Then we could test that it does indeed behave like it is described. (In fact, if this is too much for the manual, we could at least use the documentation to systematically extend the test-suite to cover all documented cases).

Author: I'll leave this unchanged for now.
